docs: DOC-205: Document changes to ML backend (#5642)
heartexlabs/label-studio: docs/source/guide/ml_create.md

tier: all
order: 360
order_enterprise: 310
meta_title: Write your own ML backend
meta_description: Set up your machine learning model to output and consume predictions in your data science and data labeling projects. 
section: "Machine learning"

---

Use the Label Studio ML backend to integrate Label Studio with machine learning models. The Label Studio ML backend is an SDK that you can use to wrap your machine learning model code and turn it into a web server. The machine learning server uses [uWSGI](https://uwsgi-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and [supervisord](http://supervisord.org/), and handles background training jobs with [RQ](https://python-rq.org/).

> Follow the steps below to wrap custom machine learning model code with the Label Studio ML SDK, or see [our library of example ML backends](ml_tutorials.html) to integrate with popular machine learning frameworks such as PyTorch, GPT2, and others. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the steps below to wrap custom machine learning model code with the Label Studio ML SDK, or see [our library of example ML backends](ml_tutorials.html) to integrate with popular machine learning frameworks and tools such as [Huggingface's Transformers](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/index), [OpenAI](https://openai.com/), [Langchain](https://www.langchain.com/) and others. 
```

For information on using one of Label Studio's example backends, see [Set up an example ML backend](ml#Set-up-an-example-ML-backend)

## 1. Install the ML backend repo

Download and install `label-studio-ml-backend` from the repository:

    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/HumanSignal/label-studio-ml-backend.git
    cd label-studio-ml-backend/
    pip install -e .
    ```

## 2. Create an empty ML backend

```bash
label-studio-ml create my_ml_backend
```

This creates the following directory structure, which you can modify to implement your own inference logic: 

```
my_ml_backend/
├── Dockerfile
├── docker-compose.yml
├── model.py
├── _wsgi.py
├── README.md

> └── requirements.txt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
my_ml_backend/
├── Dockerfile
├── .dockerignore
├── docker-compose.yml
├── model.py
├── _wsgi.py
├── README.md
├── requirements-base.txt
├── requirements-test.txt
├── requirements.txt
└── test_api.py
```

```

Where:

> * `Dockerfile` and `docker-compose.yml` are used to run the ML backend with Docker. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Dockerfile`, `docker-compose.yml` and `.dockerignore` are used to run the ML backend with Docker. 
```

* `model.py` is the main file where you can implement your own training and inference logic. 
* `_wsgi.py` is a helper file that is used to run the ML backend with Docker (you don't need to modify this). 

> * `README.md` has instructions on how to run the ML backend. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `README.md` must contain instructions on how to run the ML backend. 
```

> * `requirements.txt` is a file with Python dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `requirements.txt` is where you put your Python dependencies.
* `requirements_base.txt` and `requirements_test.txt` are basic dependencies (you don't need to modify this)
* `test_api.py` is where you put your model tests
```

    return predictions
```

The `predict` method is used to make predictions for the tasks. It uses the following:

- `tasks`: [Label Studio tasks in JSON format](task_format)
- `context`: [Label Studio context in JSON format](#Support-interactive-pre-annotations-in-your-ML-backend) - for an interactive labeling scenario
- `predictions`: [Predictions array in JSON format](export#Raw-JSON-format-of-completed-tasks)

Once you implement the `predict` method, you can see predictions from the connected ML backend in Label Studio.

> ### Support interactive pre-annotations in your ML backend

Reviewer: [the url below](https://github.com/HumanSignal/label-studio/pull/5642/files#diff-9e871e6b36048f0dcb8692fcb33c3fc4ca77e2b26e7cc36a24dca5c8aca6eefaL144) has to be changed to 

https://github.com/heartexlabs/label-studio-ml-backend/tree/master/label_studio_ml/examples/interactive_substring_matching

Both methods can be used elsewhere in the ML backend code, for example, in the `predict` method to get the new model weights.

### Trigger training with webhooks

Starting in version 1.4.1 of Label Studio, when you add an ML backend to your project, Label Studio creates a webhook to your ML backend to send an event every time an annotation is created or updated.

By default, the payload of the webhook event does not contain the annotation itself. You can either [modify the webhook event](webhooks) sent by Label Studio to send the full payload, or retrieve the annotation using the Label Studio API using the [get annotation by its ID endpoint](/api#operation/api_annotations_read), [SDK](sdk.html) using the [get task by ID method](https://labelstud.io/sdk/project.html#label_studio_sdk.project.Project.get_task), or by retrieving it from [target storage that you set up](storage) to store annotations.

See the [annotation webhook event reference](webhook_reference#Annotation-Created) for more details about the webhook event.

### Other methods and parameters

Other methods and parameters are available within the `LabelStudioMLBase` class:

> - `self.label_config` - Returns the [Label Studio labeling config](setup) as XML string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `self.label_interface` - Returns the Label Studio Label Interface object that contains all information about the labeling task
```

> - `self.parsed_label_config` - Returns the [Label Studio labeling config](setup) as JSON.

Reviewer: no longer needed

- `self.model_version` - Returns the current model version.

## 5. Run the ML backend server

To run with Docker Compose: 

   ```bash
   docker-compose up
```

The ML backend server is available at `http://localhost:9090`. You can use this URL when [connecting the ML backend to Label Studio](ml#Connect-the-model-to-Label-Studio).

!!! note
    `localhost` is a special domain name that loops back directly to your local environment. In the instance of Docker-hosted containers, this loops back to the container itself, and not the machine the container is hosted on. Docker provides a special domain as a workaround for this, docker.host.internal. If you're hosting Label Studio and your ML Backend inside of Docker, try using that domain instead of localhost. (`http://host.docker.internal:9090`)

### Run without Docker

To run without docker (for example, for debugging purposes), you can use the following command:

```bash
pip install -r my_ml_backend
label-studio-ml start my_ml_backend
```

> ### Modify the port
> 
> To modify the port, use the `-p` parameter:
> 
> ```bash
> label-studio-ml start my_ml_backend -p 9091
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Modify the host and port

To modify the host and port, use the following command line parameters:

```bash
label-studio-ml start my_ml_backend -p 9091 --host 0.0.0.0
```
```
